Gadsby, Chapter 1;Ernest Vincent Wright
If youth, throughout all history, had had a champion to stand up for it; to show a doubting
world that a child can think; and, possibly, do it practically; you wouldn’t constantly run
across folks today who claim that "a child don’t know anything." A child’s brain starts
functioning at birth; and has, amongst its many infant convolutions, thousands of dormant
atoms, into which God has put a mystic possibility for noticing an adult’s act, and figuring
out its purport.
Up to about its primary school days a child thinks, naturally, only of play. But many a
form of play contains disciplinary factors. "You can’t do this," or "that puts you out,"
shows a child that it must think, practically or fail. Now, if, throughout childhood, a brain
has no opposition, it is plain that it will attain a position of "status quo," as with our
ordinary animals. Man knows not why a cow, dog or lion was not born with a brain on a
par with ours; why such animals cannot add, subtract, or obtain from books and
schooling, that paramount position which Man holds today.
But a human brain is not in that class. Constantly throbbing and pulsating, it rapidly
forms opinions; attaining an ability of its own; a fact which is startlingly shown by an
occasional child "prodigy" in music or school work. And as, with our dumb animals, a
child’s inability convincingly to impart its thoughts to us, should not class it as ignorant.
Upon this basis I am going to show you how a bunch of bright young folks did find a
champion; a man with boys and girls of his own; a man of so dominating and happy
individuality that Youth is drawn to him as is a fly to a sugar bowl. It is a story about a
small town. It is not a gossipy yarn; nor is it a dry, monotonous account, full of such
customary "fill-ins" as "romantic moonlight casting murky shadows down a long,
winding country road." Nor will it say anything about tinklings lulling distant folds;
robins carolling at twilight, nor any "warm glow of lamplight" from a cabin window. No.
It is an account of up-and-doing activity; a vivid portrayal of Youth as it is today; and a
practical discarding of that worn-out notion that "a child don’t know anything."
Now, any author, from history’s dawn, always had that most important aid to writing: an
ability to call upon any word in his dictionary in building up his story. That is, our strict
laws as to word construction did not block his path. But in my story that mighty
obstruction will constantly stand in my path; for many an important, common word I
cannot adopt, owing to its orthography.
I shall act as a sort of historian for this small town; associating with its inhabitants, and
striving to acquaint you with its youths, in such a way that you can look, knowingly, upon
any child, rich or poor; forward or "backward;" your own, or John Smith’s, in your
community. You will find many young minds aspiring to know how, and why such a thing
is so. And, if a child shows curiosity in that way, how ridiculous it is for you to snap out:—
"Oh! Don’t ask about things too old for you!"
Such a jolt to a young child’s mind, craving instruction, is apt so to dull its avidity, as to
hold it back in its school work. Try to look upon a child as a small, soft young body and a
rapidly growing, constantly inquiring brain. It must grow to maturity slowly. Forcing a
child through school by constant night study during hours in which it should run and
play, can bring on insomnia; handicapping both brain and body.
Now this small town in our story had grown in just that way:— slowly; in fact, much too
slowly to stand on a par with many a thousand of its kind in this big, vigorous nation of
ours. It was simply stagnating; just as a small mountain brook, coming to a hollow, might
stop, and sink from sight, through not having a will to find a way through that
obstruction; or around it. You will run across such a dormant town, occasionally; possibly
so dormant that only outright isolation by a fast-moving world, will show it its folly. If you
will tour Asia, Yucatan, or parts of Africa and Italy, you will find many sad ruins of past
kingdoms. Go to Indo-China and visit its gigantic Ankhor Vat; call at Damascus, Baghdad
and Samarkand. What sorrowful lack of ambition many such a community shows in thus
discarding such high-class construction! And I say, again, that so will Youth grow
dormant, and hold this big, throbbing world back, if no champion backs it up; thus
providing it with an opportunity to show its ability for looking forward, and improving
unsatisfactory conditions.
So this small town of Branton Hills was lazily snoozing amidst up-and-doing towns, as
Youth’s Champion, John Gadsby, took hold of it; and shook its dawdling, flabby body until
its inhabitants thought a tornado had struck it. Call it tornado, volcano, military onslaught,
or what you will, this town found that it had a bunch of kids who had wills that would
admit of no snoozing; for that is Youth, on its forward march of inquiry, thought and
action.
If you stop to think of it, you will find that it is customary for our "grown-up" brain to cast
off many of its functions of its youth; and to think only of what it calls "topics of maturity."
Amongst such discards is many a form of happy play; many a muscular activity such as
walking, running, climbing; thus totally missing that alluring "joy of living" of childhood.
If you wish a vacation from financial affairs, just go out and play with Youth. Play "blindman’s
buff," "hop-scotch," "ring toss," and football. Go out to a charming woodland spot
on a picnic with a bright, happy, vivacious group. Sit down at a corn roast; a marshmallow
toast; join in singing popular songs; drink a quart of good, rich milk; burrow into that big
lunch box; and all such things as banks, stocks, and family bills, will vanish on fairy wings,
into oblivion.
But this is not a claim that Man should stay always youthful. Supposing that that famous
Spaniard, landing upon Florida’s coral strands, had found that mythical Fountain of
Youth; what a calamity for mankind! A world without maturity of thought; without man’s
full-grown muscular ability to construct mighty buildings, railroads and ships; a world
without authors, doctors, savants, musicians; nothing but Youth! I can think of but a
solitary approval of such a condition; for such a horror as war would not, —could not
occur; for a child is, naturally, a small bunch of sympathy. I know that boys will "scrap;"
also that "spats" will occur amongst girls; but, at such a monstrosity as killings by
bombing towns, sinking ships, or mass annihilation of marching troops, childhood would
stand aghast. Not a tiny bird would fall; nor would any form of gun nor facility for
manufacturing it, insult that almost Holy purity of youthful thought. Anybody who
knows that wracking sorrow brought upon a child by a dying puppy or cat, knows that
childhood can show us that our fighting, our policy of "a tooth for a tooth," is abominably
wrong.
So, now to start our story.
Branton Hills was a small town in a rich agricultural district; and having many a
possibility for growth. But, through a sort of smug satisfaction with conditions of long ago,
had no thought of improving such important adjuncts as roads; putting up public
buildings, nor laying out parks; in fact a dormant, slowly dying community. So
satisfactory was its status that it had no form of transportation to surrounding towns but
by railroad, or "old Dobbin." Now, any town thus isolating its inhabitants, will invariably
find this big, busy world passing it by; glancing at it, curiously, as at an odd animal at a
circus; and, you will find, caring not a whit about its condition. Naturally, a town should
grow. You can look upon it as a child; which, through natural conditions, should attain
manhood; and add to its surrounding thriving districts its products of farm, shop, or
factory. It should show a spirit of association with surrounding towns; crawl out of its lair,
and find how backward it is.
Now, in all such towns, you will find, occasionally, an individual born with that sort of
brain which, knowing that his town is backward, longs to start things toward improving
it; not only its living conditions, but adding an institution or two, such as any city, big or
small, maintains, gratis, for its inhabitants. But so forward looking a man finds that trying
to instill any such notions into a town’s ruling body is about as satisfactory as butting
against a brick wall. Such "Boards" as you find ruling many a small town, function from
such a soporific rut that any hint of digging cash from its cast iron strong box with its big
brass padlock, will fall upon minds as rigid as rock.
Branton Hills had such a man, to whom such rigidity was as annoying as a thorn in his
foot. Continuous trials brought only continual thornpricks; until, finally, a brilliant plan
took form as John Gadsby found Branton Hills’ High School pupils waking up to Branton
Hills’ sloth. Gadsby continually found this bright young bunch asking:— "Aw! Why is this
town so slow? It’s nothing but a dry twig!!"
"Ha!" said Gadsby; "A dry twig! That’s it! Many a living, blossoming branch all around us,
and this solitary dry twig, with a tag hanging from it, on which you will find: ‘Branton
Hills; A twig too lazy to grow!’"
Now this put a "hunch" in Gadsby’s brain, causing him to say: "A High School pupil is not
a child, now. Naturally a High School boy has not a man’s qualifications; nor has a High
School girl womanly maturity. But such kids, born in this swiftly moving day, think out
many a notion which will work, but which would pass our dads and granddads in cold
disdain. Just as ships pass at night. But supposing that such ships should show a light in
passing; or blow a horn; or, if—if—if— By Golly! I’ll do it!"
And so Gadsby sat on his blossom-bound porch on a mild Spring morning, thinking and
smoking. Smoking can calm a man down; and his thoughts had so long and so constantly
clung to this plan of his that a cool outlook as to its promulgation was not only important,
but paramount. So, as his cigar was whirling and puffing rings aloft; and as groups of
bright, happy boys and girls trod past, to school, his plan rapidly took form as follows:—
"Youth! What is it? Simply a start. A start of what? Why, of that most astounding of all
human functions; thought. But man didn’t start his brain working. No. All that an adult
can claim is a continuation, or an amplification of thoughts, dormant in his youth.
Although a child’s brain can absorb instruction with an ability far surpassing that of a
grown man; and, although such a young brain is bound by rigid limits, it contains a
capacity for constantly craving additional facts. So, in our backward Branton Hills, I just
know that I can find boys and girls who can show our old moss-back Town Hall big-wigs
a thing or two. Why! On Town Hall night, just go and sit in that room and find out just
how stupid and stubborn a Council, (put into Town Hall, you know, through popular
ballot!), can act. Say that a road is badly worn. Shall it stay so? Up jumps Old Bill Simpkins
claiming that it is a townsman’s duty to fix up his wagon springs if that road is too rough
for him!"
As Gadsby sat thinking thus, his plan was rapidly growing: and, in a month, was actually
starting to work. How? You’ll know shortly; but first, you should know this John Gadsby;
a man of "around fifty;" a family man, and known throughout Branton Hills for his high
standard of honor and altruism on any kind of an occasion for public good. A loyal
churchman, Gadsby was a man who, though admitting that an occasional fault in our
daily acts is bound to occur, had taught his two boys and a pair of girls that, though folks
do slip from what Scriptural authors call that "straight and narrow path," it will not pay to
risk your own Soul by slipping, just so that you can laugh at your ability in staying out of
prison; for Gadsby, having grown up in Branton Hills, could point to many such man or
woman. So, with such firm convictions in his mind, this upstanding man was constantly
striving so to act that no complaint from man, woman or child should bring a word of
disapproval. In his mind, what a man might do was that man’s affair only and could stain
no Soul but his own. And his altruism taught that it is not difficult to find many ways in
which to bring joy to such as cannot, through physical disability, go out to look for it; and
that only a small bit of joy, brought to a shut-in invalid will carry with it such a warmth as
can flow only from acts of human sympathy.
For many days Gadsby had thought of ways in which folks with a goodly bank account
could aid in building up this rapidly backsliding town of contribution could do? In this
town, full of capitalists and philanthropists contributing, off and on, for shipping warming
pans to Zulus, Gadsby saw a solution. In whom? Why, in just that bunch of bright, happy
school kids, back from many a visit to a city, and noting its ability in improving its living
conditions. So Gadsby thought of thus carrying an inkling to such capitalists as to how this
stagnating town could claim a big spot upon our national map, which is now shown only
in small, insignificant print.
As a start, Branton Hills’ "Daily Post" would carry a long story, outlining a list of factors
for improving conditions. This it did; but it will always stay as a blot upon high minds and
proud blood that not a man or woman amongst such capitalists saw, in his plan, any call
for dormant funds. But did that stop Gadsby? Can you stop a rising wind? Hardly. So
Gadsby took into council about forty boys of his vicinity and built up an Organization of
Youth. Also about as many girls who had known what it is, compulsorily to pass up many
a picnic, or various forms of sport, through a lack of public park land. So this strong,
vigorous combination of both youth and untiring activity, avidly took up Gadsby’s plan;
for nothing so stirs up a youthful mind as an opportunity for accomplishing anything that
adults cannot do. And did Gadsby know Youth? I’ll say so! His two sons and girls, now in
High or Grammar school, had taught him a thing or two; principal amongst which was
that all-dominating fact that, at a not too far distant day, our young folks will occupy
important vocational and also political positions, and will look back upon this, our day;
smiling kindly at our way of doing things. So, to say that many a Branton Hills "King of
Capital" got a bit huffy as a High School stripling was proving how stubborn a rich man is
if his dollars don’t aid so vast an opportunity for doing good, would put it mildly! Such
downright gall by a half-grown kid to inform him; an outstanding light on Branton Hills’
tax list, that this town was sliding down hill; and would soon land in an abyss of national
oblivion! And our Organization girls! How Branton Hills’ rich old widows and plump
matrons did sniff in disdain as a group of High School pupils brought forth
straightforward claims that cash paving a road, is doing good practical work, but, in filling
up a strong box, is worth nothing to our town.
Oh, that class of nabobs! How thoroughly Gadsby did know its parsimony!! And how
thoroughly did this hard-planning man know just what a constant onslaught by Youth
could do. So, in about a month, his "Organization" had "waylaid," so to say, practically
half of Branton Hills’ cash kings; and had so won out, through that commonly known
"pull" upon an adult by a child asking for what plainly is worthy, that his mail brought
not only cash, but two rich landlords put at his disposal, tracts of land "for any form of
occupancy which can, in any way, aid our town." This land Gadsby’s Organization
promptly put into growing farm products for gratis distribution to Branton Hills’ poor;
and that burning craving of Youth for activity soon had it sprouting corn, squash, potato,
onion and asparagus crops; and, to "doll it up a bit," put in a patch of blossoming plants.
Naturally any man is happy at a satisfactory culmination of his plans and so, as Gadsby
found that public philanthropy was but an affair of plain, ordinary approach, it did not
call for much brain work to find that, possibly also, a way might turn up for putting
handicraft instruction in Branton Hills’ schools; for schooling, according to him, did not
consist only of books and black-boards. Hands, also should know how to construct
various practical things in woodwork, plumbing, blacksmithing, masonry, and so forth;
with thorough instruction in sanitation, and that most important of all youthful activity,
gymnastics. For girls such a school could instruct in cooking, suit making, hat making,
fancy work, art and loom-work; in fact, about any handicraft that a girl might wish to
study, and which is not in our standard school curriculum. But as Gadsby thought of such
a school, no way for backing it financially was in sight. Town funds naturally, should carry
it along; but town funds and Town Councils do not always form what you might call -
synonymous words. So it was compulsory that cash should actually "drop into his lap,"
via a continuation of solicitations by his now grandly functioning Organization of Youth.
So, out again trod that bunch of bright, happy kids, putting forth such plain,
straightforward facts as to what Manual Training would do for Branton Hills, that many
saw it in that light. But you will always find a group, or individual complaining that such
things would "automatically dawn" on boys and girls without any training. Old Bill
Simpkins was loud in his antagonism to what was a "crazy plan to dip into our town
funds just to allow boys to saw up good wood, and girls to burn up good flour, trying to
cook biscuits." Kids, according to him, should go to work in Branton Hills’ shopping
district, and profit by it.
"Bah! Why not start a class to show goldfish how to waltz! I didn’t go to any such school;
and what am I now? A Councilman! I can’t saw a board straight, nor fry a potato chip; but
I can show you folks how to hang onto your town funds."
Old Bill was a notorious grouch; but our Organization occasionally did find a totally
varying mood. Old Lady Flanagan, with four boys in school, and a husband many days
too drunk to work, was loud in approval.
"Whoops! Thot’s phwat I calls a grand thing! Worra, worra! I wish Old Man Flanagan had
had sich an opporchunity. But thot ignorant old clod don’t know nuthin’ but boozin’,
tobacca shmokin’ and ditch-diggin’. And you know thot our Council ain’t a-payin’ for no
ditch-scoopin’ right now. So I’ll shout for thot school! For my boys can find out how to fix
thot barn door our old cow laid down against."
Ha, ha! What a circus our Organization had with such varying moods and outlooks! But,
finally such a school was built; instructors brought in from surrounding towns; and
Gadsby was as happy as a cat with a ball of yarn.
As Branton Hills found out what it can accomplish if it starts out with vigor and a will to
win, our Organization thought of laying out a big park; furnishing an opportunity for
small tots to romp and play on grassy plots; a park for all sorts of sports, picnics, and so
forth; sand pots for babyhood; cozy arbors for girls who might wish to study, or talk. (You
might, possibly, find a girl who can talk, you know!); also shady nooks and winding paths
for old folks who might find comfort in such. Gadsby thought that a park is truly a most
important adjunct to any community; for, if a growing population has no out-door spot at
which its glooms, slumps and morbid thoughts can vanish upon wings of sunlight, amidst
bright colorings of shrubs and sky, it may sink into a grouchy, faultfinding, squabbling
group; and making such a showing for surrounding towns as to hold back any gain in
population or valuation. Gadsby had a goodly plot of land in a grand location for a park
and sold it to Branton Hills for a dollar; that stingy Council to lay it out according to his
plans. And how his Organization did applaud him for this, his first "solo work!"
But schools and parks do not fulfill all of a town’s calls. Many minds of varying kinds will
long for an opportunity for finding out things not ordinarily taught in school. So Branton
Hills’ Public Library was found too small. As it was now in a small back room in our High
School, it should occupy its own building; down town, and handy for all; and with
additional thousands of books and maps. Now, if you think Gadsby and his youthful
assistants stood aghast at such a gigantic proposition, you just don’t know Youth, as it is
today. But to whom could Youth look for so big an outlay as a library building would cost?
Books also cost; librarians and janitors draw pay. So, with light, warmth, and all-round
comforts, it was a task to stump a full-grown politician; to say nothing of a plain, ordinary
townsman and a bunch of kids. So Gadsby thought of taking two bright boys and two
smart girls to Washington, to call upon a man in a high position, who had got it through
Branton Hills’ popular ballot. Now, any politician is a convincing orator. (That is, you
know, all that politics consists of!) and this big man, in contact with a visiting capitalist,
looking for a handout for his own district, got a donation of a thousand dollars. But that
wouldn’t start a public library; to say nothing of maintaining it. So, back in Branton Hills,
again, our Organization was out, as usual, on its war-path.
Branton Hills’ philanthropy was now showing signs of monotony; so our Organization
had to work its linguistic ability and captivating tricks full blast, until that thousand
dollars had so grown that a library was built upon a vacant lot which had grown nothing
but grass; and only a poor quality of it, at that; and many a child and adult quickly found
ways of profitably passing odd hours.
Naturally Old Bill Simpkins was snooping around, sniffing and snorting at any signs of
making Branton Hills "look cityish," (a word originating in Bill’s vocabulary.)
"Huh!! I didn’t put in any foolish hours with books in my happy childhood in this good
old town! But I got along all right; and am now having my say in its Town Hall doings.
Books!! Pooh! Maps! BAH!! It’s silly to squat in a hot room squinting at a lot of print! If you
want to know about a thing, go to work in a shop or factory of that kind, and find out
about it first-hand."
"But, Bill," said Gadsby, "shops want a man who knows what to do without having to
stop to train him."
"Oh, that’s all bosh! If a boss shows a man what a tool is for; and if that man is any good,
at all, why bring up this stuff you call training? That man grabs a tool, works ‘til noon;
knocks off for an hour; works ‘til —"
At this point in Bill’s blow-up an Italian Councilman was passing, and put in his oar, with:-
"Ha, Bill! You thinka your man can worka all right, firsta day, huh? You talka crazy so
much for my boota! You lasta just a half hour. Thisa library all righta. This town too mucha
what I call tight-wad!"
Oh, hum!! It’s a tough job making old dogs do tricks. But our Organization was now
holding almost daily sittings, and soon a bright girl thought of having band music in that
now popular park. And what do you think that stingy Council did? It actually built a most
fantastic band-stand; got a contract with a first-class band, and all without so much as a
Councilman fainting away!! So, finally, on a hot July Sunday, two solid hours of grand
harmony brought joy to many a poor Soul who had not for many a day, known that balm
of comfort which can "air out our brains’ dusty corridors," and bring such happy thrills, as
Music, that charming Fairy, which knows no human words, can bring. Around that gaudy
band-stand, at two-thirty on that first Sunday, sat or stood as happy a throng of old and
young as any man could wish for; and Gadsby and his "gang" got hand-clasps and handclaps,
from all. A good band, you know, not only can stir and thrill you; for it can play a
soft crooning lullaby, a lilting waltz or polka; or, with its wood winds, bring forth old
songs of our childhood, ballads of courting days, or hymns and carols of Christmas; and
can suit all sorts of folks, in all sorts of moods; for a Spaniard, Dutchman or Russian can
find similar joy with a man from Italy, Norway or far away Brazil.